Author Information: I am Emeritus Professor Jeff Hughes, co-inventor of a series of mobile apps known as PainChek® along with Professor Kreshnik Hoti and Dr Mustafa Atee. These apps were developed to assist healthcare professionals and carers assess pain in those who cannot self-report pain, such as preverbal children and people with advanced dementia. Currently, I am the Chief Scientific Officer of PainChek Ltd, and hold an Emeritus Professor appointment within the Curtin Medical School. As a pharmacist, I have worked in community, hospital and academic pharmacy, and have spent my career working to optimise the care of patients through my professional practice, teaching and research. I have received numerous professional awards, including the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia 2004 Pharmacist of the Year, the Australasian Pharmaceutical Sciences Association 2014 Medal of Merit and the Society of Hospital Pharmacists of Australia 2020 FJ Boyd awards in recognition of my service to pharmacy and the community.

Affiliations: PainChek
Chief Scientific Officer, Present, Australia

Abstract: The assessment of pain is the cornerstone of good pain management. However, many people cannot communicate their pain, including preverbal children, those with intellectual and/or physical disabilities, and those with neurological disorders. This often leads to under-recognition and undertreatment of pain, resulting in unnecessary suffering for the individual and inappropriate treatment of behavioural changes with psychotropic medications. This is why monitoring behavioural change as an indicator of pain is so important. The PainChek® Adult app, born from the desire to improve pain management in older persons with advanced dementia, is the first medical technology to use AI in combination with smart automation. It utilises automated facial detection and analysis to detect facial expressions indicative of pain, and through a series of digital checklists, allows the user to document other observed pain-related behaviours. The app then automatically calculates a pain score and assigns a pain intensity to assist in clinical decision making. This presentation will cover the PainChek® story from adult to infant and beyond, explaining the underpinning science and clinical experience to date.

Transcript: Depression is very common in people with dementia, and we unfortunately put one big box around them and call everyone with dementia and produce an enormous amount of stigma around that. And similarly, so with people with disability, when people don't understand that it's a person that we're talking about, and not a condition. I was terribly worried about people in nursing homes I was going to see who had no change in their pain management, but rather treatment of their responsive behaviors. And as a consequence to that, they can get better, they actually got worse. 

So, I had a light bulb moment in a nursing home. Mr. Farate, who's one of the co-inventors of PainChek, came to me and said, he wanted to do a PhD. I suggested a project to improve pain management in people with dementia by improving pain assessing. That was back in 2010. We know that up to 80% of people in aged care experience pain, and 50% of those people have dementia. Yet, when you look at the data, both here in Australia and overseas, the reports of pain would be around less than 20% more pain assessments. 

Language is very important, capacity, memory, impairment and behavioral symptoms are all the things that make it challenging to assess pain in people who cannot verbally tell you that they're in pain. Everyone who's got a non-verbal child or a preverbal baby knows how difficult that is. My daughter used to stop breathing and collapse when she had teething pain. It is incredibly difficult. If you think it's pain, you should treat it as pain. One of the methods is a therapeutic trial. Pain is often incorrectly interpreted. 

We have behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia, and we know that as your dementia gets worse. Up to 90% of people will suffer from these. We get to the point where we have people with challenging behaviors, and that's the sort of problem where you see people locked away in their arm, or they're restrained in their chair, or they've given drugs to medically or chemically restrain them. But what we need to understand, it's unmet need. It's responsive behaviors. 

Our aim was to produce a point of care application, and we use artificial intelligence to look at the face, which is really important, because there's an enormous amount of bias when we look at people's faces. The literature will tell you that healthcare professionals who are exposed to people with large amounts of pain become accustomed to it, so when they look at your face, they don't believe that you're in pain. 

We have a series of checklists, and the person has to rate those but we have a definition for each one of those items, and we hope to reduce in the rate of reliability, reduce inter-rater variation, and then the tool automatically calculates a painful and gives you pain severity. All the data goes up into the cloud, and it can also be shared. 

Our journey started back in 2012 when Mustafa commenced his PhD. We got a grant from Dementia Australia, which was a good starting point for people who advocate for people with dementia. Over the next couple of years, we conceptualized the tool. We found a group of people in Switzerland called nViso, and they were using facial expressions to assess babies dislike or like to baby food. They built us a prototype in November of 2013. In 2016, our spin-up company was bought by PainChek, and in 2017 we became the first ever observational pain assessment tool to be regulatory cleared in the world. 

Over 5 million PainChek assessments have been done, both here in Australia, New Zealand, Canada and United Kingdom. We're moving forward in this particular space, but our purpose is to give a voice to those people who cannot verbalize their pain. 

While we were developing PainChek for people with dementia, we also conceptualized pain assessment tools for children, so the infant and the innates for preverbal children up to three years of age, and then our goal moving forward beyond that for children with intellectual disability or inability to talk as well. 

We are also looking at crying and can we determine the difference between a vocalization which isn't a cry and a vocalization which is a cry, and whether that cry is pain or non-pain related? We've done some work on that, and we've already got good results, and what we want to do is add that to the face so that if the child is crying and it's in pain, then we can then look at the what level of pain they have. 

We are also working with the Telethon Kids Institute to build an app that looks at disability. We want to use co-designs. We want parents to assist us with developing what are non-facial feature components. We will build a new model for the face it may or may not look like the same model we have at the moment, but we will do that in the population of children with disability. 

Just a couple of things to finish off with. There is an iceberg. So pain assessment is one component, but there are a number of other benefits that come from that in relation to care, standardizing care, making care more efficient, improving communication. 

The other thing that we're trying to do is move from pain scores to personalized pain profiles, because if I tell you at the moment, I've got a pain score of eight, and you look at me and you go, No way, but you don't know what eight impacts me. You've got no idea what eight is. It's just a number. Those scales were constructed for the purpose of research. They have no real basis in terms of pain experience. 

So with that, I say thank you and I'm happy to add some questions with Frank.